I am a programmer, and one of things I use frequently and understand fairly well is the concept of how to secure data so that only authorized parties can access it. That being the case, friends and family and strangers who are not programmers often ask me to explain things they hear in the news related to the following topics which are all somewhat related on different levels. I hope the info is understandable enough to shed some light on the subjects so people can see the social implications of each one.

# What is encryption? What went on with the San Bernadino shooter's iPhone?

Encryption is when you have data, like `The dog ate my pizza`, and with some fancy math turn it into mumbo jumbo, like `jA0EBwMCxEMNrGlTGGRg0kkBGpjD5vgrJqeslFuTiQGmdc2wbGySUYjiU+El9hPZnF3iOmiwJUKHixV9bCSJyFXAD+QF8AyW782ZDnZay/SDjMmXGjfEeAj/`, which can only be read by someone who has a special key. In this case the key was `aa38f8dd6c6bdb5a27afae81fe3a7e5a`, and with that key you can decrypt the mumbo jumbo back into the original `The dog ate my pizza`. The important part is that the data *cannot* be read without the key, and even a key that short is too big for anyone to guess. No matter how much number crunching you do, even if you ran all the supercomputers in the world for several years, it wouldn't even come close to guessing the key. This is called *strong encryption* and has existed for a couple decades now, and it means that people without the key cannot read the data, which means *theives cannot read it* and *governments cannot read it*.

That second point is what has brought the topic of encryption into the news, because governments do not like it when they want to read something, but cannot, because of math. It becomes very painful some times, like when a convicted murderer's hard disk contains possible evidence exposing other murderers' identities, and the police cannot read the disk because it is encrypted and the owner is dead. The judges and politicians involved in such cases have been fighting against the existence of strong encryption, and hopefully everyone can see why, because sometimes it hurts. What the news media and the policitians usually fail to explain is that every day in millions of instances, strong encryption protects your data from other less lawful parties who would like to read it. Every bank account, credit card number, medical record, and personal email is or should be protected by strong encryption. You cannot have digital security which blocks a thief but somehow does not block the government, and that is not because of any laws, it is because that is the way math works.

The San Bernadino shooter's iPhone event was an interesting case with lots of nuances, but the bottom line was that the shooter's iPhone was an old model with relativlely weak encryption (model 5C with a four digit guessable pin instead of a 256 bit unguessable key which the newer iPhones have), which is why the FBI was able to pay some specialists $1.3 million to crack it. Apple's response that they would not crack it was a good one in my opinion, because they were not only legitimately protecting their customers from identity thieves, but also because legal requests for them to crack into the current generation of iPhones under the same circumstances are not possible even for Apple.

# What is the Dark Web?

# What is Bitcoin?